---
layout: default
title: How does the sequencing of information affect communication?
date: 2016-08-27
author: Tom Wedell
unit: 4
content_types: text

---

## How does the sequencing of information affect communication?</h2>
Unit Leader: Thomas Wedell

One of the main concepts necessary to understanding the design process is the use of TIME. Careful ordering and distribution of information is essential to successful communication.

In the expanded world of Graphic Design time plays a major role. Not only in how we engage in the design of an exhibit or screen based project, but also in the considerations a designer must build into two-dimensional “fixed” surfaces, such as signs, books,
posters, and charts.

The graphic designer today must learn to master the art of pacing. How a viewer encounters information in a specific sequence and the pace at which that information is viewed, is one of the basic elements of communication. The order in which ideas
are accessed is at the essence of any design project.

###Learning Objectives:
— Gain an understanding of effective editing and how the proper sequencing of information enhances how that information is understood.
— Develop a critical awareness of time and how it affects the reading of a design.
— Communicate ideas/thoughts/images to others.
— Understand framing how composition emphasizes meaning.
— Build basic digital video production skills.
— Identify and test the properties of time such as rhythm, pacing, and repetition and how they are employed in visual communication.

Essay on the Importance of Time/M. Sanjeeta
Notes on the Poetics of Time from: Temporality in Life as Seen Through Literature/
Lawrence Kimmel
