---
layout: default
title: DS1 Syllabus
date: 2016-08-27
author: Everyone
content-type: other
---

<p>Graphic design occupies an ever-expanding, ever-redefined territory at the intersection of verbal and visual languages. Its media spans everything from websites to postcards, film to signage, typefaces to billboards. Its methods make use of both sides of the brain: pairing  logic, critical analysis, research, and planning with intuitive search, mark-making and visual expression. Graphic designers are inquirers, observers, poets, editors, curators, analysts, researchers, commentators, and critics.
</p>
<p>	Rather than attempt to codify this expansive landscape, or to delineate a sequential path through it, this course takes this ambiguity as license for experimentation, discovery, and play. You will encounter and engage the tools, materials, and processes of graphic design in functional context,
as means to self-directed ends. </p>
<p>The emphasis will be on methodologies of making — observation, analysis, ideation, translation, curation, research — and on developing a personal voice and approach.
	Design Studio will take the form of a series of question-based units, each initiated by a faculty member and contextualized by a presentation, event, or workshop. Units may span the entire term, a few weeks, or a single class period. Design Studio is a fast-paced course that necessitates a self-directed, open-ended, experimental and playful mindset. Units will not define outcomes or prescribe processes, but rather will aim to inspire lines of enquiry, challenging students to explore unfamiliar subject matter, tools, media, and processes by their own initiative. </p>


<h2>  Sections</h2>

<h6>01	John Caserta</h6>
	<p>jcaserta@risd.edu<br>
  Room 210 </p>


<h2>Objectives</h2>

*Develop habits for self-directed research and inquiry
*Develop critical thinking skills
*Develop rhetorical, communication and presentation skills
*	Encourage a pluralistic approach to design problems
*	Encourage work with emerging media
*Address and participate in contemporary social and cultural issues (in design)
*	Place present day challenges within historical context

<h2>Semester-long
Deliverables</h2>

*	Sketchbook
*	Research/Inspiration Blog (i.e. tumblr)
  to communicate ongoing findings
  for projects.
*	Reflective Notes as insights or aware-
  ness on a curiosity, excitement,
  or experience.
course website

http://ds1618.risd.gd

<h2>Grading</h2>

<p>Grades in D.S. do not emphasize end products, but the necessary work that leads to successful end products. Evidence of the below are visible in process blog, sketchbook, completion of units as directed by the faculty:</p>

20% 	Contribution
	Attendance,
  participation, motivation and personal commitment

20% 	Inquiry
	Search, research, study, and networking of knowledge and insights

20% 	Breadth
	Range of experience, willingness to experiment, take risks and broaden horizons

20%	Depth
	Attention to the quality of ideas, critical thought and authenticity and voice

20% 	Finish
	Demonstration of skills in craft, visual design, presentation and communication

<h2>Attendance</h2>

<p>Students should arrive on time and prepared for
  each class. Three unexcused absences will result
  in failure of the course.</p>

<h2>Etiquette</h2>

<p>Please turn off all
  cell phones — no txting or emailing during class.</p>



<h2>Schedule</h2>
<h5>Week 01 / Sept 13</h5>
<p>Unit 1 Given (Keetra Dixon)</p>

<h5>Week 02	/ 	Sept 20</h5>
<p>Unit 1 Continues</p>

<h5>Week 03	/ 	Sept 27	</h5>
<p>Unit 1 Final<br>
Unit 2 Given (Tom Ockerse)</p>

<h5>Week 04	/ 	Oct 04</h5>
<p>Unit 2 Continues</p>

<h5>Week 05	/ 	Oct 11</h5>
<p>Unit 2 Final
Unit 3 Given (John Caserta)</p>

<h5>Week 06	/ 	Oct 18</h5>
<p>Unit 3 Continues</p>

<h5>Week 07	/ 	Oct 25</h5>
<p>Unit 3 Final
Unit 4 Given (Tom Wedell)</p>

<h5>Week 08	/ 	Nov 01</h5>
<p>Unit 4 Continues</p>

<h5>Week 09	/ 	Nov 08</h5>
<p>Unit 4 Final
Unit 5 Given (James Goggin)</p>

<h5>Week 10	/ 	Nov 15</h5>
<p>Unit 5 Final</p>
